in the sense of different ways through
the history of how technology and art
relate to each other and how as
technological shifts have led to new
media for artists to work within and
then a few ideas about the present
moment so one way of thinking about how
programming has changed in time and how
machines and technology have changed in
time is through thinking about the sort
of the social constructs and the
attitudes of programmers so the term
real programmers comes from Eric Raymond
so here's a bit of a short text from
Eric Raymond the real programmers
typically came out of engineering or
physics backgrounds they wore white
socks and polyester shirts and ties and
thick glasses and coated in machine
language and assembler in Fortran and a
half a dozen other languages now
forgotten so that's one view and that's
still I think the dominant cultural view
we have of what a programmer is here's a
different view this is Admiral Grace
Hopper she was a person who was very
important in the idea of general
purposes general-purpose programming
languages that are independent from
specific machines the next wave of
programming and this is just my biased
point of view of how how things
simplifying how things happened is
termed hackers and the idea of the
hacker is that programming has moved
away from the military complex
programmers are no longer people who
want to necessarily calculate ballistics
tables but maybe they have other ideas
about
coding and computing can be for so for
example the the generation of hackers
were the first people to write a
computer game this is two graduate
students at MIT playing space Wars and
this gives you a sense of what the PDP
computer looks like and how the shift to
smaller computers it shifted the
attitude and access to these machines
shifted the attitudes towards
programming a next wave is what we can
call the amateur and in this case we
have individuals who aren't
professionals who are getting into and
excited about using computers and the
basic language which just recently
celebrated its 50th anniversary was very
important in this at that time when sort
of people from my generation were
growing up you would find books like
this which were exciting books of
learning how to program for making games
and for a whole really a whole
generation of people we grew up with
this kind of interface you would turn on
the computer and you'd have a blinking
Square and the idea was the computer
didn't really do anything for you it
didn't feed media to you but you could
tell it to do things and so for example
many people first started doing things
like this like 10 print gray area and
then 20 go to 10 and then we can run
that and sort of see what these
instructions that we give the computer
are capable of doing and if we list that
again it's a way of thinking it's a way
of taking a thought and putting that
into a construction that allows it to be
acted so if we make a small shift put a
semicolon at the end of the line and
then run it we have an extraordinary
sort of visual exciting world that we've
just constructed through a few short
ideas so actually I want to stop that
there we go the fourth wave and this is
sort of of course the other waves
continue this is this idea of the hybrid
so programming is no longer exclusive or
exotic now we have people who are really
the professionals and other fields maybe
they're an architect maybe they're an
artist or a designer maybe they're a
statistician maybe they're an economist
but they're using the ideas of software
as a core part of what they're doing so
in a way that technology falls away and
it becomes a sort of a conceptual model
for producing work so this is an example
for my collaborator on the processing
project from Ben fry this is a
visualization of genome data so Ben is
an example of a person who is an
extraordinary programmer and thinking in
terms of that those constructs but he's
also an extraordinary visual designer as
well so the next part of the talk is
titled the crucible and this is
comprised mostly of taking books off my
shelf and taking photographs of what's
inside those books as well as some some
selected videos so the material
materials were going to be looking at it
are primary sources they're from the era
and we also have some text from
secondary sources from now a lot of this
information was only available for
decades in these relatively obscure
books that you could find at some
libraries or sort of used or rare
booksellers but fortunately that's
really changed now so this part of the
talk is a little bit like a bibliography
and all of these catalogs are now
available online is PDF so you can dig a
little bit deeper all these videos or
many of these videos can be found on
YouTube now so you can so if this can be
an introduction that can be taken
further at a different time so first
we're gonna start off by looking at this
image this image is from 1965 and it's a
drawing by Frieder nage so imagine just
for a moment how you think this image
might have been made and then imagine
how you think it might be made now and
then we'll get a window into how this
image was constructed this is a one ton
machine called a zoo's graph I'm at 64
it's a very different process in inkjet
printing or laser writing this computer
has a lot of blinking lights it has more
blinking lights
it also has vacuum tubes and it also has
numbers that flash by quickly this is a
video that was made for German
televisions to be to be broadcast
nationally in 1965 with some very
enthusiastic cameramen but you can get a
sense of the scale and the object of
this machine and the labor this would
have went into constructing it so the
computer is operated within it an
air-conditioned booth by a computer
operator that we'll see in a moment
there he is
and this is Frieda not gay this is the
the the mathematician who produced that
image we were looking at and you can see
him here working through his ideas so
the code goes into the machine and then
paper tape comes out of the machine out
of the computer I think it was a
Selectric s' and then that paper tape
goes into the zoo's graph I'm at the
drawing machine where the information
encoded on the paper controls the way
that the two motors the X and the y and
the up and down work in concert to
produce the drawing there we have the
paper tape and then here we have the
paper tape reading in to produce the
image
okay so in 1965 we have the responsive
eye exhibition opening at the Museum of
Modern Art but I think it's kind of
proto technology and art in 1965 we have
the very first commercial gallery
showing images created and constructed
on a plotter through a program in a
gallery that was in Stuttgart and we
have your geek app which is vision plus
value series so the response of eye
exhibition I think is an interesting way
of reflecting on our present time so
we're gonna watch a short clip from a
video produced for a National American
television and what I think is
interesting about this video is how we
get a sense of the public perception of
art and the public perception of the
marriage of technology and art and I
think that offers an interesting window
into the present we can see what's
changed and in my opinion has really not
changed over the last 50 years
I think the audio needs to come up on
this between February 23rd and April
25th 1965 who owned the responsive eye
you do if there is one thing more than
any other that we like to assume about a
worker line it's that it will sit still
and behave itself while we take a look
at what the artist has created but now a
whole movement in modern art has come
into a focus that will not stay in focus
that responds to every my new change in
the way you look at it that hops around
in varying dimensions that variously
puzzles a noise or confounds
this assortment of work has been lumped
under the collective title of optical
how do people respond to the response of
I we talked to some of them as they came
out of the exhibit did you find it as
disturbing as you turn physically yes it
was disturbing to my eyes I felt like I
was going around in circles after a
while but artistically I thought it was
excellent you liked it I loved it
why well it did something to me it it
made me feel that I was looking things
that I had never seen before
through different eyes I like to move
around and it's a very moving show in
terms of you know activity you move
around in the show you don't stay in one
place how did you happen to come
I brought my children here a few days
ago and they've been so very excited by
the new art that I thought that I would
come back and take a better look at it
without without any added distractions
yes it looks it's start to look
different when you moved around it
looked like this for an object you don't
find it disturbing I don't mind being
disturbed and it has it has made quite a
few inroads in Europe with artists I
believe that this experiment started in
the United States as did pop art and now
I see even in this show many European
painters who have taken it up and done
quite quite successful things in it you
brought your whole art class from Fort
Lee New Jersey
I've taken some selected students who
are interested in art to this art show
art majors do you think that this is an
important event
I certainly do it's the most current
thing around now I think it's vital that
every student see this show John Kennedy
and the time suggests that it's one of
the most exciting artistic events in a
decade but I can't understand why I I
don't think it's an artistic event I
think it's a tourist attraction maybe
but not an artistic event there doesn't
seem to be any art involved art is
something you live with and appreciate
and enjoy and you couldn't live with
this and you can't appreciate it for
more than five minutes why don't you
want them in your home well they're just
too big for one thing and well there are
some smaller huh
well I was struck by the big ones yes I
didn't notice this moment as a curator
would you like to take this work home
with you oh yes of course not all of it
I don't say that I like every every
piece in the show we all have our
favorites but there are lots of pieces
that I could live with very very well
these people are just a few of the tens
of thousands who have flocked to this
show and now for the responsive eye a
response from eye on New York so that
was funny but at the same time I think
there's really deep currents in truth
and a lot of what was said that apply
still to this day and I while we were
watching I couldn't help imagining what
if we would sort of recreate this kind
of event in the fat gold show like what
what would be different what would be
the same so in 1966 we have nine
evenings theater and engineering at the
Armory in New York poster with
engineering sort of electrical diagrams
and there were a number of different
pieces this is Robert Rauschenberg open
score so here we had a tennis match we
had contact microphones on the rackets
that would then over time turn out all
the lights in the armory until it was
pitch black and then the audience would
be filmed with infrared cameras this is
John Cage's variation 7my John Cage's
maybe my the most important or
influential artist for my own work in a
lot of different ways but what I like
about this
these images are I like the woman in the
the top in the middle and sort of seeing
how she's reacting to the piece
and this is Deborah Hayes dance called
solo which is also part of the nine
evenings
maybe we have sound in this one
so the nine evenings ten artists 30
engineers I'm an estimated 8500
engineering hours and then the New York
Times always really generous with new
forms of art rights rather like an
elephant going through two years of
gestation and giving birth to a mouse
so in 1967 we had the founding of the
Center for Advanced visual studies at
MIT and then art experiments and art and
technology grew out of the nine evenings
so civs
was founded by Kepesh and he writes that
it was about the absorption of the new
technology as an artistic medium the
interaction of artists scientists
engineers and industry and the raising
of the scale of work to the scale of the
urban setting media geared to all
sensory modalities incorporating of
natural processes and the acceptance of
participation of spectators in a way
that becomes where the art becomes a
confluence wonderful ideas really I
think unique at the time here's a photo
of the studio of talkies Greek artist
and he was working a lot with material
and matter he did a lot with
electromagnetism in his sculptural
objects he was a fellow at CA vs EA t
established by Billy kluever came out of
Bell Labs and fed Wall Hauer as well as
Robert Rauschenberg and Robert Whitman
so the primary role of EA T was to
provide technical assistance for artists
and acting as a matching agency between
artists with specific feasible projects
in mind with engineers to sort of work
out those problems 1968 we have more
energy into the into this world we have
the cybernetic serendipity exhibition
the machine at the Museum of Modern Art
and then some more beginnings
experiments are in technology was EA T's
exhibition at the same time as the
machine but at the Brooklyn Museum and
we also had a number of publications
come out in 68 to start to begin to
theorize and provide a history and
context for this new emerging work so
the cybernetic serendipity exhibition
had no distinction between this is art
this is science this is engineering and
it also had an educational component so
here we're see were have the section on
the history of cybernetics what is a
digital computer what I found really
interesting about these is early moment
is that we already had most of the
genres that we still have today
computer-generated graphics films
computer composed and played music poems
and texts and also in the realm of
sculpture we have cybernetic devices of
works of art cybernetic environments and
remote-controlled robots and painting
machines all these things that we're
still fascinated with such a long time
into the future this is a documentation
of the cybernetic serendipity exhibition
this sculpture is calmed by red light
and it's activated by blue light
in the second section we have cybernetic
devices as works about this machine
which consists of three rows of
different colored bulbs response to
sound it's by Richard Huggle and it
comes from America Nam Julie pipe has
eleven television sets which he has
transformed so that one cannot see any
of the programs that are going out and
yet they provide the source for some of
the images which one can see some of
these can be manipulated by the audience
with magnets
okay so the catalog for cybernetic
serendipity documents what was in the
show quite well you can see here the
sound-activated mobile machines by jean
tinguely one interesting thing about
cybernetic serendipity is that after it
was in London it moved to Washington DC
for an exhibition there and then after
DC some of it the story that I've been
told went on a bus from Washington to
San Francisco and so some of these
things are actually still at the
Exploratorium so you see this robot
where this robot in the corner Albert
I've been told that Albert is still at
the Exploratorium I would have seen it
with my own eyes and I don't know how
much of the electronics are still still
authentic or still the originals and
then also the pendulum drawing machine
that cybernetic serendipity has been a
really long feature at the Exploratorium
so the machine exhibition was largely
about works of art that dealt with the
machine so it goes all the way back to
the futurists to early Marcel Duchamp
but it also had a section for merging
work with new technology and this was
again sponsored by EA T so I think one
of the currents at the time one of these
ideas of art and technology as it says
here in the catalogue technology now
totally dominates every step of everyday
life the artists creativity is only
slowly reestablish its prestige after
having been almost wholly eclipsed by
science and technology during the 19th
century that's a strong statement it's
not what I agree with but it's a
statement that was made at the time this
book beyond modern sculpture in my
opinion is the most radical book to deal
with these new forms of sculpture if you
look at the table of contents you can
see we have chapter 5 sculpture and
automata kinetise ISM the unrequited art
and then I think really interesting
light as a sculptural medium that's
something that's still emerging right
now and then robot and cyborg art I
think one of Burnham's premises was that
the history of sculpture was really just
a proceeding the ID the ultimate goal of
sculpture which was to build robots
1969 we have the founding of the
Exploratorium antastic amazing and in
Zagreb with the tendencies for we have
computer and visual research so at a new
forum for this kind of work in a
different setting in 1970 we have Expo
70 in Osaka
the information show at the Museum of
Modern Art which is the show that strips
out technology and software out of the
history of conceptual art so that was
the first show that sort of removed this
idea that software is a conceptual
medium and exclusively only shows work
by people who aren't working with
computation and then the software
exhibition at the Jewish Museum so this
is an image of the Pavilion in Osaka
it's shrouded in these small nozzles too
so this always sort of encased in fog
the audience enters and goes below the
building and then comes up into this
mirrored room with a full schedule of
performances this was also produced by
ehe the software exhibition for me is
the most fascinating because it's about
software as a conceptual medium and
includes both technologists for example
here we have the architecture machine
group at MIT and this was a robot arm
that would constantly move around these
small blocks that you see here pictured
and these gerbils would move around the
environment and basically contradict
what the machine was trying to do but at
the same time we have this kind of like
very high tech in the show coming from
MIT we also have john baldessari so his
conceptual work of burning all of his
paintings they go together and then this
the catalogs show also had some
educational components too so we have
computers and not what you think
but then there's a whole series of
diagrams that are precisely what we
think computers are but Ted Nelson is an
extraordinary thinker at this time in
thinking about computers outside of the
constraints of the moment this is our
last year 1971 art and technology
program at the at the LA County Museum
of Art and the book computer graphics
computer art by Herbert Franco so the
art and technology catalog is in just a
fantastic document that records what
happened at this time
it's also a document that reveals
accurately what happened at the time and
I think there's a couple things that
kind of a reflective in this can
discover one is that we see for all
practical purposes it's all white men
and there really are there were a few
women involved really very few people of
color involved and so I think it this is
what it was in 1971 and how do we
reflect on that at this moment in our
time but the catalog itself is more like
a walk through the archives we go
through the projects in their raw state
we see what the problems and the issues
were we see why they didn't come off why
some failed and why some succeeded so
these are preparatory drawings by Klaus
Oldenburg for this sculpture that he
made and then so what was the art and
Technology program about there were
three different scenarios according to
Jim Livingston in the first scenario the
artist needs corporate assistance to
produce the components of work in the
second scenario artists ought to produce
an object of art but we're experimenting
with materials which while available to
industry were still new to the art world
and then the third as she says the more
radical approach where the artist
desired no direct material gain but
instead viewed the collaboration as an
exchange so this book I'm computer after
computer art I think it's interesting in
the sense that it already has almost 50
pages on the history of computer art
when at that time it was still almost 50
years ago and so it includes things like
experiments before digital computers
like oscilloscope drawings by Ben
Lepofsky this is another early feeder
knock' these are some stills from a
computer film by Lillian Schwartz in
collaboration with Kenneth Knowlton at
Bell Labs and then we also at this time
we had fabrication so this is a Georg
nice piece that is cut out of wood using
CNC machines so although that is the
trend of the moment and really where a
lot of energy is it is something that
also has a long history as well so next
part of the talk is this time travel
where we go from 1971 to 2011 and the
idea is that we're only going to look at
a few projects in each project in a way
stands for thousands of works and sort
of like as the technology has shifted
what new kinds of expression do we have
the ability to to produce so we're gonna
start around where we left off with the
crucible Manford more and an aesthetic
program from 1971 this is the first time
that a public institution showed these
these kinds of works and here's Manfred
in the exhibition here's an image of
this plotter and here's an example of
some of the work so at the time this is
still when you know AB X had a
stronghold was still it was about
expression and this idea that an artist
would produce something that's purely
rational and write instructions in a
system that makes the work was I think
it's still radical now frankly but was
extremely radical at the time this is a
restaging of works from the exhibition
at the bit forms gallery a few years ago
so oh and the other thing to say the
works in this sort of series are there's
an eye on the bay area so a lot of the
works are from San Francisco so here we
have Lynn Hirshman Lisa sorry Lisa and
Lorna so Lynn writes Lauren is an
interactive installation as a vehicle
for people to virtually adopt the
persona of the lead character Lorna an
agoraphobic woman who lives in fear of
the outside world so fear is generated
by ingesting media that she sees via her
remote unit on her TV set so this is a
video at laserdisc if you don't know
about laserdiscs please go and look into
them they're extraordinary and they also
allowed for nonlinear video so it's sort
of a proceeding to cd-roms and being
able to move through video and make
different choices so why did I ask all
the artists on these are a series of
interviews that I did why they chose to
work with technology so why even bother
do I do this and so Lynn wrote um it was
the only way to create this work that
used invisible architecture for
interaction it created a space and time
for contemplation and interpretation on
multiple and infinite levels
do you dare press forward so this is a
special piece
it's Larry Cuba's calculated movements
from 1985 and this was a work that Larry
spent three years working on and it is
in the tradition of making films from
software so early on there were two ways
of getting work out of the computer
there were plotters and there was
setting up a film camera onto a small
screen and making film out of it so this
is Larry's setup you can see at the very
top the camera that's capturing the
images from the CRT and I think what's
special about this is this is a
presentation we have the full video to
see Larry's provided it for us in very
good resolution and the way we're
presenting it's kind of been endorsed by
him and Larry is also here today so I
invite you to seek him out and ask him
questions about his film so we're gonna
watch this transfer now it's about 6
minute film and I know that gray area
there's a lot of energy around image in
the sound synthesis in this film is the
next is a really wonderful exploration
into that from this time
okay so we've had drawings we've had
interactive laserdisc now we've had the
genre of computer-generated films
abstract animation we're jumping forward
from 85 to 2001 to Josh
Amy and Amy some they rule which was
just recently updated a few years ago
again this is an extraordinary piece I'm
not gonna talk in detail about this one
because really the best way to see it is
to go online and to look at it but so in
asking Josh about it so so what is this
piece he says they rule aims to provide
a glimpse into some of the relationships
of the US ruling class it takes as its
focused the boards of some of the most
powerful US companies which share many
of the same directors so why did he make
this why did he choose to do this in
this format rather than a different
format and he writes no other medium
allows the same combination of massive
persistent social collaboration and
interaction particularly software on the
internet where so many people but by no
means all can connect through software
and create meaningful relationships with
each other so in the early days early
ish days of the web this piece really
utilized that medium I think in a
powerful way
you can you can create a map and save it
you can share it with other people and
it becomes a point of departure for
further research so we moved to 2005
we're back at performance audio-visual
performance and unlike in 1985 where
it's three years of work to produce a
film that's rendered out here we have a
GF and SUSE making a piece which is very
much real time so it's a collaborative
cd/dvd collaboration and so when asked
why are you using you know software why
not just produce films or perform in
some other way um sue wrote as artists
we have been able to grow but not
outgrow our tools this is due in large
part to the fact that we can program our
own software tools inside the
environment so as our ideas change we
can expand our tools to follow those
ideas so here's a very short clip from
mini movies
I'm sorry to cut that but I feel the way
to the clock I'm sorry and sorry to sue
any Jeff so that was encoded in linear
media onto DVD but it grew out of a long
collaboration a lot of live performances
so moving forward into 2011 we have
advances of course in rejection
technology which were benefiting from
today and this is a piece by Jennifer
Stein camp called Madame Curie and it's
in San Diego and it's really a tribute
to Curry's Curry's work here we have
some video of that so Sein camp writes
why why does she utilize technology in
her work she says I use 3d software to
create virtual objects and spaces I then
place them into real space but the real
and virtual spaces are transformed by
each other forming an in-between space a
space your body can understand she cites
the book expanded cinema as an early
influence for her and kind of opening up
her ideas about what she can do
you
and then the last project I wanted to
share with you is United visual artist
origin so this was at Fort Mason I don't
remember what year that was a few years
back and this project it's it's at an
architectural scale utilizing advances
in sound and light display and LEDs and
so I have a short video of this one too
the projects also a collaboration with
scanner for the for the audio component
so how to wrap this up I think here
we're talking about the present and so I
wanted to take the opportunity to do
something different for what I
ordinarily do and I was really excited
to share with you these different these
different pieces so in my opinion we as
these larger communities of artists that
we've been aspiring and sometimes
struggling to create our own
technologies and I think it's different
from from different times we really want
to build something that's unique to what
we're trying to do and I think more
importantly in the building these
technologies we're trying to build our
own cultures around emerging technology
and I think that's the difficult bit I
think that we as communities we have
different priorities and we have
different politics than the companies
who produce the software that so often
artists and designers and architects the
whole range of artists use so what's
different now from 1965 what has really
changed at the moment and just to
summarize it into two things
I'm definitely Moore's laws played out
and the cost of hardware has come down
and that's allowed for one kind of
access to the technologies and then also
I think the importance of the Internet
can't be underestimated so things like
chat rooms and instant messaging and
forums and things that have come after
those have allowed a different kind of
communication between artists than when
was there before artists have always
been writing their own programming
languages for themselves and for their
work but they didn't really proliferate
in the way that they have since since
the we've had the Internet as a way of
communicating things like Network
version control to support free Libre
open source software things like
SourceForge and github and bitbucket
have really allowed the tools of this
community to grow it in unprecedented
ways so I think now we have been
building our own tools and they have had
an impact on art and on culture and also
on the development of technology sort of
in the world at large
I think Arduino is the extreme example
of this like the last few months
notwithstanding those were ideals that
our communities aspire to open source
free access to the information with
real focus on community so some of the
conditions though that generated eate
and art and technology have disappeared
the ones I just mentioned but some
things still remain so what's still the
same corporations still want to use
artists for public relations and
marketing and artists want to
collaborate with them there are still
exotic technologies and materials and
both companies and artists desire to
collaborate in that sense so for example
emerging fabrication techniques are in a
similar place to where digital computers
were 30 or 40 years ago if you have a 1
million dollar machine for doing a
certain kind of digital fabrication
process that's not something an art
collective or an individual can have in
their home and that was once the case
for these computers you would have a
million-dollar or a half a million
dollar computer that artists would have
to really struggle and fight for access
to and I think we're in that place now
with with fabrication so I do still have
some fundamental questions about how the
two relate I think the most fundamental
question is as an artist or designer why
should I care about technology and then
also this idea of learning to use
software versus learning to create
software using software means using
software as a tool becoming expert in
these tools versus learning how to make
our own tools I think when you make your
own tools you really open up the space
for exploration and for pursuing really
unique and different kinds of goals and
then the software you're using may
espouse and then I think as we start to
invent our own tools we need to develop
new ways of thinking about computation
each software tool each programming
language is just one way of accessing
and one way of thinking about what these
machines can be and how we can use them
this for example is um how to draw a
triangle in two different languages that
really force different mental models of
what of how to think about your work and
then of course we have this different
mental model as well different ways of
thinking about code in different ways of
thinking about our work through these
languages so to conclude finally I think
as a community we've done a very good
job in the last decade at reducing the
barrier to learning and making with
emerging technologies I think we've
succeeded at that we've made it more
and I think the fields fundamentally
different than it was a decade ago you
no longer need to have multiple years of
computer science instruction at a
university in order to make something
you want to make that's really been the
goal I think of the last 10 years I
think however in relationship to
diversity access inclusion we're doing
better if you think back to that image
of 1971 from the art and technology
catalog but we're still not doing well
enough and so I think that now that we
have reduced the barrier to using tech I
think really the the new wave that we
have a responsibility for really trying
to shift this culture forward and to not
just bring people into the culture as it
is but to to move this culture to make
access and to make this more of a social
endeavor and I think that as a
communities of artists we can and really
should be take the lead in this and that
is the conclusion thank you very much